This scene includes
Barbara and Erps.
Erbs?
Erps.
Barbara: "What a nice plate!"
Erps: "That's from Ardy."
Barbara: "Are you okay?"
Erps: "Getting there."
"It's just that this plate,"
"I remember we bought it
at Dimensione."
"We bought an entire set
when we moved here."
Barbara: "Look, this one still
has its price tag"
"but says it's from 'SM Home World'."
Erps: "Really?"
Barbara will show the plate to Erps.
Erps: "Oh yeah, wait."
"I remember that was from Dimensione.
He requested that."
"I was late and he'd already
chosen a design."
"He even fought with me
because I was late."
"So this is what we bought."
Barbara: "But it says 'SM Home World'."
Erps: "Oh right,
I was with someone else."
Barbara: "Uh huh."
Barbara is a black girl.
Erps: "Oh yeah,"
"it's when my friends came over
and I wanted to prepare something"
"but I didn't want
to use paper plates."
"I went with someone
to SM Home World."
"We bought the cheapest set
of plates and utensils."
"It's such a hassle
'cause we just rode a train."
"We braved the crowd while holding the plates,
making sure we didn't bump anyone."
That's where the scene ends.
Very interesting.
I find it very interesting.
You were able to manifest-
Of course I understand,
the scene is just starting
but it's going somewhere nice.
The attack to grief was tangential.
But at the same time,
grief and forgetfulness
interweaved smoothly.
He remembers the time
they bought plates together.
It just so happened
that wasn't the plate they bought.
So therefore, forgetting
that detail
says something.
Maybe that's where the topic
is going until he realizes
the memory is gradually fading.
Okay. Next.
In the living room, Ramil and Julio
are at both ends of the sofa.
They're watching TV.
The remote control
is at the center table.
Julio gets the remote control.
Julio: "Can you switch
to the basket ball game"
"while it's still on commercial?"
Ramil switches back
to the first channel
Ramil: "No."
Little by little,
they move closer to each other.
Julio changes it again.
Julio: "The commercials are still on."
Ramil switches it back again.
Ramil: "I don't want to miss out.
It's my favorite show."
Julio switches
the channel again.
Julio: "So what if you miss a little?"
"Are you president
of its fans club?"
Ramil stands up and so does Julio.
Ramil: "That's how I am.
I only want to focus on what I want."
Julio: "Why, you think when you switch
channels, you'll lose interest?"
"That you can't go back anymore?
Is that it?"
Ramil: "Maybe you're used to that."
"Used to multitasking everything,
watching TV and relationships."
Julio gets the remote control,
turns the TV off.
He looks at Ramil for a long time.
Antoinette Jadaone.
- What channels were those?
Maybe there were just two.
Just buy another TV.
Nice use of object
to deflect the issue
to something more palpable.
I wasn't able to write
the stage direction yet.
But basically the premise
is there're two characters
A mom and a daughter.
The daughter is off to work
and there's a dress code.
Her mom sees her wearing heels.
Then the scene starts.
Mom: "You're wearing that
to work?"
Points at the heels
of her daughter.
Daughter: "Why not?"
Mom: "You need to be careful,
you might trip.
Daughter: "This is part
of the dress code for work."
"If I don't wear this,
I might get penalized and a salary cut."
"I've already incurred so many penalties.
I don't want to get laid off."
Mom: "Just talk to your boss.
He'll understand your situation."
Daughter: "It's only been
a month, Mom."
Mom: "You still need
to be careful."
"Stay there, I'll get
your flats so you can change."
Daughter: "Mom,"
"I'm not ready yet."
Pause.
Mom: "What did you say?"
Daughter: "I don't want to--
I'm not ready."
Mom: "What do you mean
you're not ready?"
"You're a woman.
God made you for this."
Daughter: "This is keeping me from
doing the things I still want to do."
"I can't even follow
the dress code because of this."
"And now, I might get fired."
"Where are we going
to get money, then?"
Mom: "Don't think like that."
"It's natural for a woman
to be a mother.
"I was able to raise you
even when I got pregnant early."
"You can do it too."
Daughter: "But did you ever ask me if I wanted this?"
That's it.
So the object
here is the heels.
And the issue started
with the use of the heels.
So, it's like this.
Just to explain the flow
of the whole process,
if you really did your homework.
I really want you
to see the process
that a writer goes through
when fascinated by a topic.
So I let you write
about your beliefs.
That's you as a writer.
But you're not the only one
in this world.
There will always be people
who'll disagree with your opinions.
It's important to know that.
Face that fact
and embrace it.
This other side of the topic
will give you the reason
to continue the story.
In fact, this will start
your story's conflict.
You won't get sources
for a conflict
if you'll only use
your opinion and principles.
Just make a personal essay, then,
where you won't have enemies
but yourself.
Here, we're looking for a way
to convince viewers
that there could be something
right and wrong on this side
as well as on the other.
But show it,
through dynamic development,
how this progresses.
In the third step,
it's still you contemplating,
but in dialogue form.
That's also important because
you'll be forced to organize
your arguments and thoughts
until you reach the climax.
That's going to be your template.
When you reach
the fourth step,
you detach yourselves
and find a character
to dramatize the debate
being talked about.
The reason why
I required an object
was to draw you away
from the debate on the topic
because what we're trying
to create is a situation
where the topic will
naturally come out,
without explicitly
talking about it.
But we still get it.
That’s the significance of the object.
A lot of you said,
"I don’t know where this scene will go."
But you still managed
to talk about it
without outrightly saying
the way you're saying it
when you were debating with yourself.
I guess that’s
an important component
in writing a play.
Although you want
to say something,
how will you implicitly
deliver your message?
How will you convey it without using
the keywords in your mind?
And one particular
useful device
is to throw in an object
that these characters will negotiate.
Objects are used
in almost any play
that has ever been written
because it pushes action.
Shakespeare used a handkerchief,
dagger, sword, skull...
Through his usage
of these objects,
the ideas and concepts
become more palpable, more tactile.
Whether it's a dog, an argument
on child custody, to a missing key...
This is one important device
that people use.
Another reason why I added the
object as a requirement
is because it forces
the characters
to confront the present.
This prompts them
to look for a solution
to the problem
or impetus of the object.
That’s the downside.
When you want to talk about
what you want to talk about so strongly,
you feel so strongly about this
and it has to be said over and over,
it might sound
like a manifesto.
I asked you to do a manifesto
but that’s different
from doing a play.
And one way to occlude that
is to throw in an object.
Why? Because it
pushes characters
to be at the present time
and not talk about
their own feelings.
Nothing will happen
if they just talk.
But when you put an object
then that object becomes...
an impetus
to push the story forward
at the same time
reveal the characters’ feelings,
their beliefs or stances,
their opinions or truths.
And many times,
it is the cleverness
of the choice of that object
which can stand
also as a metaphor.
Like for example,
"The Glass Menagerie"
where the woman’s glass collection
had a huge impact on the story.
Or a woman selling flowers,
"Flores Para Los Muertos".
Tennessee Williams, for example,
is good in using different objects.
A telegram
can make or break
the character.
That’s the significance
of seemingly unimportant objects,
where all of a sudden, they're the ones
that push the action
and demand from the characters
to confront themselves, their issues.
If you notice most titles
of plays and movies use objects.
"The Red Violin",
"The Scarlet Letter",
"The House with Seven Gables"
It's been that way ever since.
Let’s now go to the main craft.
Your philosophies and beliefs in life
are things I can't teach you.
Because these
are your experiences.
It took you years to understand
and believe in them.
These are your truth claims.
If they were just opinions,
then they wouldn’t be compelling enough
for you to write about them.
Again, we go back to what you
really want to write about.
It's not just really want.
It's more than that.
It’s a truth claim
that you have had.
I can't teach you these things.
It has to come from you.
But you're right,
it can still change.
In fact, his perspective changed
during the writing process.
For all you know,
it’s the play that will help you
change your views
about certain things.
Especially if your play
requires some research.
You might realize
something's wrong.
- Is it possible, for the
whole duration of the play,
to never reach
the conceptual debate?
Never reach what?
The debate we did in exercise 3.
It just remains a concept?
- Yes. In fact, it's a take off.
But you should never lose sight
of what you want to say.
It should still be there.
You just find ways of saying
what you want to say
without saying it.
- So you can finish the play
without mentioning that it's about-
It's about this.
But it's the audience who says,
"What's the play about?"
"About grief."
That’s the mark or indicator
that you succeeded as a writer
because you were able to say
what you want to say about grieving
without explicitly saying it.
Because you used
other ways to convey it.
Your take off
might have been the plate.
That’s the cleverness or deft of hand.
That’s where you create the magic.